Major rewrite of the specification (#9)
LegReq/did-btcr2: chapters/Index.md

#### Bech32m Decoding

Given:

* `encodedString` - required, the Bech32m-encoded string from a prior encoding
  operation

1. Initialize `hrp` and `dataBytes` to the result of Bech32m decoding the
   `encodedString` as described in
   [BIP-0350](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0350.mediawiki).
1. Return `hrp` and `dataBytes`.

### JSON Canonicalization and Hash

A macro function that takes in a JSON document, `document`, and canonicalizes it
following the [JSON Canonicalization Scheme](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8785).
The function returns the `canonicalizedBytes`.

1. Set `canonicalBytes` to the result of applying the JSON Canonicalization Scheme
   to the `document`.
1. Set `hashBytes` to the result of applying the SHA256 cryptographic hashing
   algorithm to the `canonicalBytes`.
1. Return `hashBytes`.

### Fetch Content from Addressable Storage

A macro function that takes in SHA256 hash of some content, `hashBytes`, converts these
bytes to an InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) v1 ::Content Identifier:: (CID) and attempts
to retrieve the identified content from ::Content Addressable Storage:: (CAS).

The function returns the retrieved `content` or null.

> 
> 1. Set `cid` to the result of converting `hashBytes` to an IPFS v1 ::CID::.
> 1. Set `content` to the result of fetching the `cid` from a ::CAS:: system. Which ::CAS:: systems
>    checked is left to the implementation. TODO: Is this right? Are implementations just supposed to check all CAS they trust?
> 1. If content for `cid` cannot be found, set `content` to null.
> 1. Return `content`
> 
> ### Root did:btcr2 Update Capabilities
> 
> #### Derive Root Capability from **did:btcr2** Identifier
> 
> This algorithm deterministically generates an [Authorization Capabilities for Linked Data](https://w3c-ccg.github.io/zcap-spec/) (ZCAP-LD) root capability from a given **did:btcr2** identifier. Each root
> capability is unique to the identifier. This root capability is defined and understood
> by the **did:btcr2** specification as the root capability to authorize updates to the
> specific **did:btcr2** identifiers DID document.
> 
> The algorithm takes in a **did:btcr2** identifier and returns a `rootCapability` object.
> 
> 1. Define `rootCapability` as an empty object.
> 1. Set `rootCapability.@context` to '<https://w3id.org/zcap/v1>'.
> 1. Set `encodedIdentifier` to result of calling algorithm
>    `encodeURIComponent(identifier)`.
> 1. Set `rootCapability.id` to `urn:zcap:root:${encodedIdentifier}`.
> 1. Set `rootCapability.controller` to `identifier`.
> 1. Set `rootCapability.invocationTarget` to `identifier`.
> 1. Return `rootCapability`.
> 
> Below is an example root capability for updating the DID document for **did:btcr2:k1qqpuwwde82nennsavvf0lqfnlvx7frrgzs57lchr02q8mz49qzaaxmqphnvcx**:
> 
> ```{.json include="json/CRUD-Operations/Update-zcap-root-capability.json"}
> ```
> 
> #### Dereference Root Capability Identifier
> 
> This algorithm takes in a root capability identifier and dereferences it to the
> root capability object.
> 
> This algorithm takes in a `capabilityId` and returns a `rootCapability` object.
> 
> 1. Set `rootCapability` to an empty object.
> 1. Set `components` to the result of `capabilityId.split(":")`.
> 1. Validate `components`:
>    1. Assert length of `components` is 4.
>    1. `components[0] == urn`.
>    1. `components[1] == zcap`.
>    1. `components[2] == root`.
> 1. Set `uriEncodedId` to `components[3]`.
> 1. Set `btcr2Identifier` the result of `decodeURIComponent(uriEncodedId)`.
> 1. Set `rootCapability.id` to `capabilityId`.
> 1. Set `rootCapability.controller` to `btcr2Identifier`.
> 1. Set `rootCapability.invocationTarget` to `btcr2Identifier`.
> 1. Return `rootCapability`.
> 
> Below is an example of a `btcr2Update`. An invoked [ZCAP-LD](https://w3c-ccg.github.io/zcap-spec/)
> capability containing a `patch` defining how the DID document for
> **did:btcr2:k1qqpuwwde82nennsavvf0lqfnlvx7frrgzs57lchr02q8mz49qzaaxmqphnvcx** SHOULD
> be mutated.
> 
> ```{.json include="json/CRUD-Operations/Update-zcap-root-capability-patch.json"}
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```

Remove appendix algorithms

### Publication Date {.unnumbered .unlisted}

20th September 2025

### Licence {.unnumbered .unlisted}

[Mozilla Public License Version 2.0](https://github.com/dcdpr/did-btcr2/blob/main/LICENSE)

### Contribute {.unnumbered .unlisted}

::: {.unformattedTable}
------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
Specification Repository  <https://github.com/dcdpr/did-btcr2>
Issues                    <https://github.com/dcdpr/did-btcr2/issues>
------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
:::

### Copyright {.unnumbered .unlisted}

© 2025 Digital Contract Design

---

## Abstract

**did:btcr2** is a censorship-resistant Decentralized Identifier (DID) method using the Bitcoin blockchain as a Verifiable Data Registry to announce changes to the DID document. It supports zero-cost off-chain DID creation; aggregated updates for scalable on-chain update costs; long-term identifiers that can support frequent updates; private communication of the DID document; private DID resolution; and non-repudiation.

## Introduction and Motivation

> Public digital identity was introduced to the Internet through Pretty Good Privacy's (PGP) foundational legal work in the 1990s. With Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs), digital identity can be preserved through a rotation of key material, without relying on a centralized party.

Author: The introduction to this section doesn't quite flow into the subsections. Maybe just another sentence like

> We were motivated to develop the BTCR2 DID method for the following reasons:

To tackle reliance on public DID documents head-on, this DID method introduces private DID documents, in which resolving the DID requires additional information delivered either alongside or in a separate communication from the DID controller. We call this transfer ::Sidecar:: delivery. Our approach ensures that successful resolution ALWAYS results in the same DID document for all parties, so that every party in the ecosystem sees the same cryptographically anchored result.

### Late Publishing

Many DID methods lack verifiable provenance. For many, it is simply impossible to reconstruct a cryptographically verifiable history of updates. Instead, they use a Verifiable Data Registry that can be used to rewrite history. Bitcoin's blockchain is the premiere global database for immutably anchoring information to a specific time. This DID method ensures that every BTCR2 DID is anchored on a single, canonical, immutable history for the lifetime of the DID. It is simply not possible for anyone to modify the history of the DID. We call this feature ::Non-Repudiation::.

### Offline Creation

> Finally, we wanted to support the creation of DIDs without requiring on-chain interactions. BTCR creation depended on getting a transaction on-chain. BTCR2 supports creating DIDs with sophisticated DID documents without registering them on-chain. In fact, all BTCR2 DIDs start with offline creation. Only updates to the DID document require on-chain interactions. Our approach supports both key-based deterministic DIDs and document-based deterministic DIDs. In key-based DIDs, the DID itself contains everything you need to bootstrap an initial DID Document with usable verification methods suitable for authentication, attestation, and capability invocation and delegation. For document-based DIDs, additional sidecar data must be used to create the initial DID document. Offline creation allows unlimited DID creation and use without requiring any on-chain or online interactions, making it suitable for a wide range of high-volume, low cost use cases.

Author: ```suggestion
Finally, we wanted to support the creation of DIDs without requiring on-chain interactions. BTCR creation depended on getting a transaction on-chain. BTCR2 supports creating DIDs with sophisticated DID documents without registering them on-chain. In fact, all BTCR2 DIDs start with offline creation. Only updates to the DID document require on-chain interactions. Our approach supports both key-based deterministic DIDs and document-based deterministic DIDs. In key-based DIDs, the DID itself contains everything you need to bootstrap an initial DID Document with usable verification methods suitable for authentication, attestation, and capability invocation and delegation. For document-based DIDs, additional ::Sidecar Data:: - a ::Genesis Document:: - must be used to create the ::Initial DID document::. Offline creation allows unlimited DID creation and use without requiring any on-chain or online interactions, making it suitable for a wide range of high-volume, low cost use cases.
```

The key words MAY, MUST, MUST NOT, RECOMMENDED, SHOULD, and SHOULD NOT in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt) [RFC8174](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

This document contains examples that contain JSON and JSON-LD content. Some of these examples contain characters that are invalid, such as inline comments (//) and the use of ellipsis (...) to denote information that adds little value to the example. Implementers are cautioned to remove this content if they desire to use the information as valid JSON or JSON-LD.

Interoperability of implementations of the **did:btcr2** DID method is tested by evaluating an implementation's ability to create, update, deactivate, and resolve **did:btcr2** identifier and DID documents that conform to this specification. Interoperability for producers and consumers of **did:btcr2** identifier and DID documents is provided by ensuring the DIDs and DID documents conform.

> A conforming **did:btcr2** DID is any concrete expression of the rules specified in \[Syntax\] which complies with relevant normative statements in that section.

Author: ```suggestion
A conforming **did:btcr2** DID is any concrete expression of the rules specified in [Syntax] which complies with relevant normative statements in that section.
```

Author: We likely need to do a full pass through the Index file to catch these. This happens from copying across the markdown from google.

Currently, these are not rendering as links to the sections of the spec

A conforming **did:btcr2** DID document is any concrete expression of the data model described in this specification which complies with the relevant normative statements in DID core sections [4\. Data Model](http://w3.org/TR/did-1.1/#data-model) and [5\. Core Properties](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-1.1/#core-properties). A serialization format for the conforming document is deterministic, bi-directional, and lossless, as described in [6\. Representations](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-1.1/#representations).

> A conforming registrar is any algorithm realized as software and/or hardware that generates and updates conforming **did:btcr2** identifier or conforming DID Documents and complies with the relevant normative statements in [6\. Representations](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-1.1/#representations) of DID core and the \[Create\], \[Update\] and \[Deactivate\] sections of this specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A conforming registrar is any algorithm realized as software and/or hardware that generates and updates conforming **did:btcr2** identifier or conforming DID Documents and complies with the relevant normative statements in [6\. Representations](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-1.1/#representations) of DID core and the [Create], [Update] and [Deactivate] sections of this specification.
```

> A conforming **did:btcr2** resolver is any algorithm realized as software and/or hardware that complies with the relevant normative statements in [4\. DID Resolution](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-resolution/#resolving) of the DID Resolution specification and the \[Read\] section of this specification.

Author: ```suggestion
A conforming **did:btcr2** resolver is any algorithm realized as software and/or hardware that complies with the relevant normative statements in [4\. DID Resolution](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-resolution/#resolving) of the DID Resolution specification and the [Resolve] section of this specification.
```

## Terminology

Aggregate Beacon

: An Aggregate Beacon enables multiple entities (possibly controlling multiple DIDs and possibly posting multiple updates) to collectively announce a set of ::BTCR2 Updates:: in a ::Beacon Signal::.

There can only ever be one ::BTCR2 Update:: per **did:btcr2** in a ::Beacon Signal:: from an Aggregate Beacon.

Aggregate Beacons

: ::Aggregate Beacon::

> Announced BTCR2 Update

Author: Currently unreferenced. We may want to reference it

Authorized Beacon Signals

: ::Authorized Beacon Signal::

Beacon Address

: The Bitcoin address of a ::BTCR2 Beacon::. Spends of ::UTXO:: controlled by this address are identified as ::Beacon Signals::.

Beacon Aggregator

: The entity that coordinates the protocols of an aggregate ::BTCR2 Beacon::. Specifically the Create Beacon Cohort and Announce Beacon Signal protocols.

Beacon Aggregators

: ::Beacon Aggregator::

Beacon Announcement Map

: A document that maps **did:btcr2** identifiers to ::BTCR2 Update Announcements::. This is used to distinguish which ::BTCR2 Update Announcement:: applies to which **did:btcr2** identifier.

Beacon Announcement Maps

: ::Beacon Announcement Map::

Beacon Cohort

: The set of unique cryptographic keys participating in a ::BTCR2 Beacon:: that are required to authorize spends from the ::Beacon Address::.

Beacon Cohorts

: ::Beacon Cohort::

Beacon Participant

: A member of a ::Beacon Cohort::, typically a DID controller, that controls cryptographic keys required to partially authorize spends from a ::Beacon Address::.

Beacon Participants

: ::Beacon Participant::

Beacon Signal

> : Beacon Signals are Bitcoin transactions that spend from a ::BTCR2 Beacon:: address and include a transaction output of the format `[OP_RETURN, <32_bytes>]`. Beacon Signals announce one or more ::BTCR2 Updates:: and provide a means for these payloads to be verified as part of the Beacon Signal.

Author: ```suggestion
: Beacon Signals are Bitcoin transactions that spend from a ::BTCR2 Beacon:: address and include a transaction output of the format `[OP_RETURN, OP_PUSH_BYTES, <32_bytes>]`. Beacon Signals announce one or more ::BTCR2 Updates:: and provide a means for these updates to be validated against the Beacon Signal.
```

> The type of the ::BTCR2 Beacon::  determines how these Beacon Signals SHOULD be constructed and processed to validate a set of ::BTCR2 Updates:: against the 32 bytes contained within the Beacon Signal.

Author: ```suggestion
The type of the ::BTCR2 Beacon::  determines how these Beacon Signals MUST be constructed and processed to validate a set of ::BTCR2 Updates:: against the ::Signal Bytes:: contained within the Beacon Signal.
```

Not sure if we want MUST in a terminology, but it shouldnt be SHOULD I dont think. Maybe just remove entire sentence?

Reviewer: I think we need the sentence, but we could change it to 

```suggestion
The type of the ::BTCR2 Beacon:: determines how these Beacon Signals are constructed and processed to validate a set of ::BTCR2 Updates:: against the 32 bytes contained within the Beacon Signal.
```

Beacon Signals

: ::Beacon Signal::

Beacon Type

> : The type of a ::BTCR2 Beacon::. The Beacon Type defines how ::BTCR2 Update Announcements:: are included within a ::Beacon Signal:: broadcast on the Bitcoin network. It also defines how the content committed within ::BTCR2 Update Announcements:: can be verified against the ::Beacon Signal::.

Author: ```suggestion
: The type of a ::BTCR2 Beacon::. The Beacon Type defines how ::BTCR2 Update Announcements:: are included within a ::Beacon Signal:: broadcast on the Bitcoin network. It also defines how the content committed within ::BTCR2 Update Announcements:: can be validated against the ::Beacon Signal::.
```

BTCR2 Update Announcements

: ::BTCR2 Update Announcement::

Contemporary DID Document

: The DID document that is contemporary with a Bitcoin block at a specific blockheight.
The Contemporary DID Document changes as a resolver traverses the blockchain and applies 
the relevant ::BTCR2 Updates:: announced by ::Authorized Beacon Signals:: it identifies in 
specific Bitcoin blocks.

Content Addressable Storage

: Content Addressable Storage (CAS) is a data storage system where content is addressable using ::Content Identifiers:: (CIDs). The InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) is an example of CAS.

CAS

: ::Content Addressable Storage::

Content Identifier

: A Content Identifier (CID) is an identifier for some digital content (e.g., a file) generated from the content itself such that for any given content and CID generation algorithm there is a single, unique, collision-resistant identifier. This is typically done through some hashing function.

Content Identifiers

: ::Content Identifier::

CID

: ::Content Identifier::

CIDs

: ::Content Identifier::

> Contemporary Blockheight
> 
> : The blockheight of consideration when walking the provenance of a series of DID updates. A DID document's contemporary time is the Signal Time of the ::Beacon Signal:: that announced the last ::BTCR2 Update:: applied to the DID document.

Author: ```suggestion
```

My sense is we can remove this term. We dont currently reference it anywhere, and I think Contemporary DID Document captures the concept well enough

Genesis Bytes

: The bytes used to generate a did:btcr2 identifier. These bytes are either a
  33-byte compressed SEC encoded sec256k1 public key or a 32 byte SHA256 hash of
  a ::Genesis Document::.

Genesis Document

: An intermediate representation of an ::Initial DID Document:: with the
  identifier set to the placeholder value.

Initial DID Document

: The canonical, conformant version 1 of a DID document for a specific **did:btcr2** identifier.

Initial DID Documents

: ::Initial DID Document::

Intermediate DID Document

: A representation of a DID document that it not yet fully conformant with the DID Core specification. Intermediate DID Documents for the **did:btcr2** DID method are DID documents whose identifier values have been replaced with a placeholder value.

Intermediate DID Documents

: ::Intermediate DID Document::

Invocation

> : See [Authorization Capabilities for Linked Data v0.3](https://w3c-ccg.github.io/zcap-spec/#terminology)

Author: ```suggestion
```

Another we can remove actually. We can just cite the term in the spec, rather than duplicating it here. It is not currently referenced.

Map Beacons

: ::Map Beacon::

Merkle Tree

: A tree data structure in which the leaves are a hash of a data block and every node that is not a leaf is a hash of its child node values.

The root of a Merkle Tree is a single hash that is produced by recursively hashing the child nodes down to the leaves of the tree. Given the root of a Merkle Tree it is possible to provide a Merkle path that proves the inclusion of some data in the tree.

Merkle Trees

: ::Merkle Tree::

Non-Repudiation

: Non-Repudiation is a feature of DID methods that can clearly state that all data is available to present one canonical history for a DID.

If some data is needed but not available, the DID method MUST NOT allow DID resolution to complete. Any changes to the history, such as may occur if a website edits a file, MUST be detected and disallowed. The ::Late Publishing:: problem breaks Non-Repudiation.

Offline Creation

: Offline Creation refers to when a **did:btcr2** identifier and corresponding initial DID document are created without requiring network interactions.

**did:btcr2** supports offline creation in two modes:

* Key Pair Deterministic Creation; and  
* DID Document Initiated Creation.

> Pending BTCR2 Update

Author: Currently unreferenced. We may want to reference it.

Sidecar Data

: Data transmitted via ::Sidecar::.

Signal Blockheight

: The blockheight of the Bitcoin block that included a specific ::Beacon Signal::. Blockheight is used as the internal time of the resolution algorithm.

Singleton Beacon

: A type of ::BTCR2 Beacon:: whose ::Beacon Signals:: each contain a single ::BTCR2 Update Announcement::.

Singleton Beacons

: ::Singleton Beacon::

SMT Beacon

: A type of ::BTCR2 Beacon:: which aggregates multiple ::BTCR2 Update Announcements::.  
A ::Beacon Signal:: from an SMT Beacon contains the root of an optimized ::Sparse Merkle Tree::.

SMT Beacons

: ::SMT Beacon::

Sparse Merkle Tree

: A ::Merkle Tree:: data structure where each data point included at the leaf of the tree is indexed.

This data structure enables proofs of both inclusion and non-inclusion of data at a given index. The instantiation in this specification has 2^256 leaves that are indexed by the SHA256 hash of a **did:btcr2** identifier. The data attested to at the leaves of the tree is the ::BTCR2 Update:: for that **did:btcr2** identifier that indexed to the leaf.

SMT

: ::Sparse Merkle Tree::

Sparse Merkle Trees

: ::Sparse Merkle Tree::

> Taproot
> 
> : Taproot is an upgrade to the Bitcoin blockchain implemented in November 2021\. This upgrade enabled Bitcoin transactions to be secured using ::Schnorr Signatures:: through the introduction of a new address, a Taproot address.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Another unreferenced term I think we can remove

> Target Time

Author: This is currently unreferenced, but we may want to reference it somewhere?

Reviewer 2: Hmmm. This is weird. I thought we deleted it in accepting the prior suggestion.

Anyway, will need second review after merge.

* The interpretation of a user-defined index is by mutual agreement between parties issuing **did:btcr2** identifiers and those resolving them.  
* Other users may use the same index, and **did:btcr2** identifiers will **not** be interoperable in each other's network.

When the last part of the encoding is of a `key-value`, the Human Readable Part (HRP) of the Bech32 encoding is set to `k`. When the last part of the encoding is of a `hash-value`, the HRP is set to `x`. The HRP is followed by a separator which is always `1`, which is then followed by the `bech32-encoding`.

The Augmented Backus-Naur (ABNF) for a **did:btcr2** identifier is as follows:

```
did-btcr2 = "did:btcr2:" id-bech32
id-bech32 = key-encoding / hash-encoding
hash-encoding = "x1" bech32-encoding
key-encoding = "k1" bech32-encoding
bech32-encoding = *bech32char
bech32char = "0" / "2" / "3" / "4" / "5" / "6" / "7" / "8" / "9" / "a" / "c" / 
"d" / "e" / "f" / "g" / "h" / "j" / "k" / "l" / "m" / "n" / "p" / "q" / "r" / 
"s" / "t" / "u" / "v" / "w" / "x" / "y" / "z" 
```

ABNF is defined by [Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) RFC5234](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5234).

> For details on how to interpret a BTCR2 DID, see \[Resolve\].

Author: ```suggestion
For details on how to interpret a BTCR2 DID, see [Resolve].
```

## Update Distribution

When additional data is required for resolution, the controller has two primary means for getting that data to the Resolver, both secured by cryptographic hash. The first is using ::Sidecar::. The second is ::Content Addressable Storage:: (CAS). No matter, how the Resolver gets this data, all update data must be available to process resolution. We use cryptographic hashes to ensure that the data received by the Resolver is the data secured by a legitimate update.

> All files used for resolution are identified by their SHA256 cryptographic hash calculated according to the \[JSON Canonicalization and Hash\] algorithm.

Author: I see this algo is still in the Appendix. Are we going to keep it? Or just refer to the JCS spec

As a resolver goes through the resolution process, it encounters one or more document hashes, which it uses to identify the files of interest.

While it's possible for a single **did:btcr2** identifier to mix the two distribution mechanisms, it is not recommended. Instead, it is RECOMMENDED that controllers pick a distribution mechanism and use it throughout the lifetime of a given DID.

### Sidecar

> ::Sidecar:: provides  alongside the **did:btcr2** identifier being resolved. This is analogous to a sidecar on a motorcycle bringing along a second passenger: the DID controller provides the DID document history (in the form of JSON Patch transformations) alongside the DID to the relying party so that the resolver can construct the DID document.

Author: ```suggestion
::Sidecar:: provides  alongside the **did:btcr2** identifier being resolved. This is analogous to a sidecar on a motorcycle bringing along a second passenger: the DID controller provides the DID document history (in the form of ::BTCR2 Updates:: and any additional proofs) alongside the DID to the relying party so that the resolver can construct the DID document.
```

Not sure about this one. Sidecar Data can include:

- BTCR2 Updates
- Beacon Announcement Maps
- SMT Proofs
- Genesis Document

But how specific should we be in this section

* the SHA-256 of the file.

The stringified version of the CIDv1 is accomplished using [multibase](https://github.com/multiformats/multibase) encoding. The final URL is “ipfs://\<stringified CIDv1\>”.

A resolver retrieves a file associated with a SHA256 hash by constructing the IPFS CIDv1 per the above algorithm and requesting the file from an IPFS node.

## Dereferencing

To dereference a BTCR2 DID URL, first resolve the DID in the DID URL to get the appropriate DID document. Then use that DID document to interpret the path, query, and fragment parts of the URL according to the [DID URL Dereferencing](https://w3c.github.io/did-resolution/#dereferencing) section of the [DID Resolution](https://w3c.github.io/did-resolution) specification.

Dereferencing a DID URL that has no path, query, or fragment parts MUST return the DID document from resolution.

BTCR2 provides no DID-method-specific dereferencing mechanisms. However, we anticipate a potential future option to enable a BTCR2 DID URL that dereferences Ordinal-based assets that are stored on-chain. However, this is out of scope for this specification.

## Beacons

### Overview

> A ::BTCR2 Beacon:: is a service listed in a BTCR2 DID document that informs resolvers how to find authentic updates to the DID. The service properties define a Bitcoin address to watch for transactions containing ::Beacon Signals::.

Author: ```suggestion
A ::BTCR2 Beacon:: is a service listed in a BTCR2 DID document that informs resolvers how to find authentic updates to the DID. The service properties define a Bitcoin address to watch for ::Beacon Signals::.
```

Beacon Signals are Bitcoin transactions. They dont contain them

All Beacon Signals broadcast from a ::BTCR2 Beacon:: in the ::Contemporary DID Document:: MUST be processed as part of DID document resolution. The ::Beacon Type:: in the service defines how ::Beacon Signals:: MUST be processed.

> Any on-chain Beacon Signal that cannot be processed renders the related DID invalid. For this reason, all Beacon Signals MUST ensure the approval by the DID controller, so that only approved Signals can be posted to Bitcoin. For resilience, BTCR2 DIDs can specify any number of Beacons and SHOULD include at least one Singleton Beacon as a fallback in case all Aggregation Beacons fail.

Author: ```suggestion
Any on-chain Beacon Signal that cannot be processed renders the related DID invalid. For this reason, all DID controllers SHOULD ensure the ::Beacon Addresses:: they include in their DID document require their cryptographic approval so spend ::UTXO:: controlled by the address, so that only approved Signals can be posted to Bitcoin. For resilience, BTCR2 DIDs can specify any number of Beacons and SHOULD include at least one ::Singleton Beacon:: as a fallback in case all ::Aggregation Beacons:: fail.
```

I think this may be where we disagree. But for me DID controllers can put whatever they want in their DID documents as long as the DID document remains conformant that is okay.

This includes putting in a BTCR2 Beacon with an address that they do not control. This is still a valid, conformant BTCR2 Beacon. Resolvers will process its signals during resolution just like any other Beacon, and will be none the wiser as to who controls the address. They cannot know this. They just know that the DID controller chose to include it in the DID document, so Beacon Signals from it should be considered authorized.

Reviewer 2: Good argument.

> A ::Beacon Signal:: commits to, and anchors in a Bitcoin block, 32 bytes of information that represents one of the following:

Author: ```suggestion
A ::Beacon Signal:: commits to, and anchors in a Bitcoin block 32 bytes of information. These ::Signal Bytes:: represent one of the following:
```

**did:btcr2** supports different ::Beacon Types::, with each type defining a set of algorithms for:

1. How a ::BTCR2 Beacon:: can be established and added as a service to a DID document.  
2. How ::BTCR2 Update Announcements:: are broadcast within ::Beacon Signals::.  
3. How a resolver processes ::Beacon Signals::, identifying, verifying, and applying the authorized mutations to a DID document for a specific DID.

This is an extensible mechanism, such that in the future new ::Beacon Types:: could be added.

The current, active ::BTCR2 Beacons:: of a DID document are specified in the document's `service` property. By updating the DID document, a DID controller can change the set of ::BTCR2 Beacons:: they use to broadcast updates to their DID document over time. Resolution of a DID MUST process signals from all ::BTCR2 Beacons:: identified in the latest DID document and apply them in the order determined by the version specified by the `btcr2Update`.

All resolvers of **did:btcr2** DIDs MUST support the ::Beacon Types:: defined in this specification.

> ## Aggregation

Author: The heading heirarchy of this Beacon (and Aggregation) section feels wonky.

I would probably say aggregation should be a sub heading of Beacons.

I also wonder if Beacon Types should come first?

* ::Beacon Participant:: \- A member of a ::Beacon Cohort::, typically a DID controller, that controls cryptographic keys required to partially authorize the broadcasting of a ::Beacon Signal:: to the Bitcoin blockchain.  
* Verifier \- A party verifying a **did:btcr2** identifier presentation.

How coordination between an aggregator and multiple ::Beacon Participants:: is managed is out of scope, but one possible mechanism is outlined in “MuSig2 3-of-3 Multisig with Coordinator Facilitation” at [MuSig2 Sequence Diagrams](https://developer.blockchaincommons.com/musig/sequence/#musig2-3-of-3-multisig-with-coordinator-facilitation).

When defining a ::Beacon Cohort::, the ::Beacon Aggregator:: may define the conditions for the cohort, including but not limited to:

* Automatic publication to ::CAS:: (::Map Beacon:: only).  
* Minimum and/or maximum number of ::Beacon Participants::.  
* Minimum and/or maximum number of DIDs per ::Beacon Participant::.  
* Cost of enrollment.  
* Cost per signal per DID or ::Beacon Participant::.  
* Minimum and/or maximum time between signals.  
* Number of pending updates that trigger a signal.

> #### Singleton Beacon

Author: Certainly, this as a subsection of Aggregation participants feels wrong.

But even as a subsection of Aggregation doesn't seem right?

A ::Singleton Beacon:: is a ::BTCR2 Beacon:: that can be used to announce commitments to a single ::BTCR2 Update:: targeting a single DID document. It creates a ::Beacon Signal:: that commits to a single ::BTCR2 Update Announcement::. This is typically done directly by the DID controller, as there is no ::Beacon Cohort::.

If the ::BTCR2 Update:: committed to by the ::BTCR2 Update Announcement:: is not publicly discoverable (i.e., is not published to a ::CAS:: under its hash), the only parties that are aware of it are the DID controller and any parties provided it by the DID controller.

> The `beaconType` of the `service` for a ::Singleton Beacon:: is "SingletonBeacon".

Author: ```suggestion
The type of a service defining a ::Singleton Beacon:: in a DID document is "SingletonBeacon".
```

### Map Beacon

A ::Map Beacon:: creates a ::Beacon Signal:: that commits to multiple ::BTCR2 Update Announcements:: through a ::Beacon Announcement Map::. To do so, it constructs a map where the key is the **did:btcr2** identifier and the value is the hash of the corresponding ::BTCR2 Update::, and broadcasts a SHA256 hash of the map in the ::Beacon Signal::.

If a ::BTCR2 Update:: is not publicly discoverable (i.e., is not published to a ::CAS:: under its hash), the only parties that are aware of it are the DID controller and any parties provided it by the DID controller. However, any party that has access to or is provided the map is at least aware of the existence of all **did:btcr2** identifiers in the map and the existence of their ::BTCR2 Update Announcements::.

For a ::Map Beacon::, proof of non-inclusion of a **did:btcr2** identifier is simply its absence from the map.

> The `beaconType` of the `service` for a ::Map Beacon:: is "MapBeacon".

Author: ```suggestion
The type of a service defining a ::Map Beacon:: in a DID document is "MapBeacon".
```

Removing imperative and not `beaconType`

### SMT Beacon

> An ::SMT Beacon:: creates a ::Beacon Signal:: that commits to multiple ::BTCR2 Update Announcements::, each identified by a **did:btcr2** identifier. To do so, it constructs an optimized ::Sparse Merkle Tree:: as defined in [Appendix SMT - Optimized Sparse Merkle Tree Implementation] and publishes the Merkle root.

Author: [Appendix SMT - Optimized Sparse Merkle Tree Implementation]

This is not currently in the appendix

An ::SMT Beacon:: provides maximum privacy for the DID controller, as the DID controller never has to reveal their DIDs or ::BTCR2 Updates:: to the aggregator. This introduces a small risk, as the DID controller is not required to prove control over a DID in order to participate.

> The `beaconType` of the `service` for an ::SMT Beacon:: is "SMTBeacon".

Author: ```suggestion
The type of a service defining a ::SMT Beacon:: in a DID document is "SMTBeacon".
```

this means persisting the Beacon Announcement Map and the BTCR2 Updates
announced within that map for indexes that they control. For SMT Beacon Signals,
participants must persist the ::BTCR2 Updates::, nonce values and SMT Proofs for each index they control.

#### Algo 23. Broadcast Aggregated Signal (Aggregator) {.unnumbered}

Once the ::Beacon Aggregator:: has received confirmation of the ::Beacon Signal::
from all ::Beacon Participants:: within the ::Beacon Cohort:: they finalize the signature
on the ::Beacon Signal::. Signal confirmations contain partial signatures from each participant,
these are aggregated together to create a final signature that spends the ::UTXO:: controlled
by the ::Beacon Address:: included an an input into the ::Beacon Signal::. Aggregation of partial
signatures is done following the partial signature aggregation algorithm specified in
[BIP327](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0327.mediawiki). The result is a
signed Bitcoin transaction. The aggregator then broadcasts this transaction onto the Bitcoin network.

### Deactivate

To deactivate a **did:btcr2**, the DID controller MUST add the property `deactivated`

> with the value `true` on the DID document. To do this, the DID controller constructs

Author: ```suggestion
with the value `true` to the DID document. To do this, the DID controller constructs
```

### Deployment Considerations

#### Data Retention

**did:btcr2** requires resolvers to have complete coverage of all relevant ::Beacon Signals:: and the associated updates for a specific **did:btcr2** to prevent ::Late Publishing::. This means that the updates MUST be available to resolver at the time of resolution. It is the responsibility of DID controllers to persist this data, otherwise the consequence is that the DID MAY not be resolvable (depending on data accessibility from the perspective of the resolver).  DID controllers MAY store ::BTCR2 Updates:: on a ::Content Addressable Storage:: (CAS) system. DID controllers SHOULD consider that in some constrained environments it is preferable to discard a DID and replace it with a newly issued DID, rather than rotating a key.

#### Aggregate Beacon Address Verification

> An ::Aggregate Beacon:: Address SHOULD be an n-of-n Pay-to-Taproot (P2TR) address, with a cohort key contributed to the n by each of the cohort participants. DID controllers participating in aggregation cohorts SHOULD verify the ::BTCR2 Beacon:: address is an n-of-n and that one of the n keys is the cohort key provided to the ::BTCR2 Beacon:: coordinator. This can be achieved only by constructing the address for themselves from the set of cohort keys which the coordinator SHOULD provide.

Author: ```suggestion
A ::Beacon Address:: of an ::Aggregate Beacon:: SHOULD be an n-of-n Pay-to-Taproot (P2TR) address, with a cohort key contributed to the n by each of the ::Beacon Participants::. DID controllers participating in a ::Beacon Cohort:: SHOULD verify the ::Beacon Address:: is an n-of-n and that one of the n keys is the cohort key they provided to the ::Beacon Aggregator::. This can be achieved only by constructing the address for themselves from the set of cohort keys which the aggregator SHOULD provide.
```

Update terms

#### Aggregate Beacon Signal Verification

> ::Beacon Signals:: from Aggregators that a DID controller is a participant of will either announce an update for their DID or will contain no update for their DID. The DID controller SHOULD verify that the ::Beacon Signal:: announces the update they expect (or no update) for all ::Beacon Signals:: broadcast by Aggregators before authorizing them. If they do not, then invalidation attacks become possible where a ::Beacon Signal:: announces an update for a DID that cannot be retrieved, causing the DID to be invalidated.

Author: ```suggestion
::Beacon Signals:: from ::Beacon Aggregators:: that a DID controller is a participant of will either announce an update for their DID or will contain no update for their DID. The DID controller SHOULD verify that the ::Beacon Signal:: announces the update they expect (or no update) for all ::Beacon Signals:: broadcast by Aggregators before authorizing them. If they do not, then invalidation attacks become possible where a ::Beacon Signal:: announces an update for a DID that cannot be retrieved, causing the DID to be invalidated.
```

Those parties most concerned about privacy SHOULD maintain their ::DID Update Payloads:: in a ::Sidecar:: manner and provide them to necessary parties during resolution. It is RECOMMENDED not to include any sensitive data other than the necessary DID update data.

#### Beacon Coordinators Know the DIDs Being Aggregated by a Cohort

Within ::Sparse Merkle Tree:: (SMT) ::BTCR2 Beacons::, the DID is used as a path to a leaf node in the ::SMT::. The coordinator MUST know these paths for them to be able to construct the tree and generate the correct proof paths. Within ::Content Identifier:: (CID)-based ::BTCR2 Beacons::, the coordinator MUST construct an aggregated bundle that includes all DIDs aggregated as a key to the ::CID:: for that ::DID's Update Payload::. This means that for both types of ::Aggregate Beacons::, the coordinator necessarily MUST know all DIDs being aggregated by a cohort.

#### CIDAggregate Cohort Members Know All DIDs that are Updated

> Cohort members participating in a CIDAggregate ::BTCR2 Beacon:: learn all DIDs that are updated in each ::Beacon Signal::. This is because they SHOULD verify the contents of the ::Beacon Signal:: before authorizing it and a CIDAggregate ::Beacon Signal:: contains a ::CID:: to an update bundle. An update bundle is a JSON object mapping **did:btcr2** identifiers to ::CID:: values for individual ::BTCR2 Updates::. Each DID controller SHOULD independently retrieve and verify the contents of the update bundle to ensure it contains the expected update for their DID.

Author: I think all of these considerations can be removed with the addition of the hash of the DID as the key into both the Map and SMT beacons.

We may want to replace this with another consideration for Map Beacons. 

This would be that, all participants on the Cohort see the Beacon Announcement Map containing all the keys for DIDs being updated. Even though these keys are obscured by a hash, if a participant sees a DID in the wild they would be able to tell if it is in the cohort or not.

Author: Additionally, if the updates are stored on CAS. Then it is trivial for any participant to find our the DID being updated by fetching the update

Reviewer 2: It won't let me make the suggestion here, but if you do, I'll accept.

Reviewer 2: Oh. Because it is already outdated.

#### In a System with Non-Repudiation, DID Document History is Revealed

Although it might seem obvious, one of the side effects of using a DID is that a DID controller's relying party will see their DID Document. In addition, resolving a DID document requires making available to the resolver all prior DID document updates.

## References

[BIP-0173] "Base32 address format for native v0-16 witness outputs"  
<https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki>

[BIP-0350] "Bech32m format for v1+ witness addresses"  

> <https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0350.mediawiki>  

Author: Suggest we either flesh this out futher or remove.

Probably remove for the time being since we are just citing things inline at the moment

Reviewer 2: Remove.
```suggestion
```

> ## Appendix

Author: Appendix needs cleaning up. Potentially even removing entirely.

Think the only algorithm we still reference is the JSON canonicalziation and hash one. And even then that is only in one place I have flagged
